The החכמה המופלאה שבכתר is the root of the revealed wisdom in the world of [[Atzilus - אצילות]], and it includes all the wisdom that will be revealed.

It is understood that at this level, there is much beyond the  Chochmah HaGiloy (revealed wisdom), as this level is incomparably higher than the usual levels of wisdom. 

It is important to emphasize that unlike human beings, in whom the root and potential of wisdom are not so 'equal' because it still lacks actualization, above - the power does not lack actualization (Choser Poel). On the contrary, what is actually revealed in the revealed wisdom is limited in relation to the perfection found in the 'power' of wisdom (- Chochmah Stimah). 

This is also the interpretation of the verse "He who implants the ear, shall He not hear? He who forms the eye, shall He not see?" On the one hand, physical ears and eyes are not applicable to Him, may He be blessed, and for this reason there are wicked people who say "The Lord will not see, etc.", for they too admit that the Holy One, Blessed be He, is wise and understanding, but they foolishly claim that seeing and hearing are within the realm of the body, and thus they are not applicable to God, God forbid. And about them, King David, peace be upon him, says "Understand, you senseless among the people, and you fools, when will you be wise? He who implants the ear, shall He not hear? He who forms the eye, shall He not see?" - Certainly there is the power of sensory sight above, and not only wisdom and understanding. And the proof is that the Holy One, Blessed be He, gives such powers to the creatures, and thus certainly these powers exist above as well, at an incomparably higher level! Nevertheless, this is not anthropomorphism towards Him, may He be blessed, because only the advantages of the senses exist in Him, without the deficiency of corporeality.

However, this knowledge of ours is not positive knowledge but by way of negation, that we do not 'grasp' in our minds how He sees and hears, but is it not an explicit Mishnah "Know what is above you - an eye sees and an ear hears". The philosophers denied His providence, may He be blessed, by exalting Him above all, saying - "The Lord is high above all nations, His glory is above the heavens" - that He is relevant only to the heavens - to spirituality and not to the earth - to materiality, and by virtue of this they said the Lord has forsaken the earth. But we respond and say "Who is like the Lord our God, who is enthroned on high, who looks down low upon heaven and earth", that He, may He be blessed, is exalted above both of them together, and the sight in heaven and earth is lowly in relation to Him, may He be blessed, and yet He lowers Himself to create and know the heavens and the earth.

For example - a soul in the Garden of Eden is not aware of materiality, because it is spiritual and knowledge of materiality would contradict its definition, but the Holy One, Blessed be He, who is not defined by either of them, therefore despite His knowledge of everything, this is not anthropomorphism in Him, God forbid.

And so too with this hidden wisdom, which is החכמה שבכתר, nothing is lacking from what is revealed in the wisdom of Atzilut. On the contrary, it is what grants it wisdom, and it is its root and source. However, in the hidden wisdom, the wisdom is exalted and wondrous, and is devoid of the limitations of Atzilut wisdom on the one hand, but on the other hand it has a connection with it, since it is its root. In other words, what exists in 'Aleph' - the wisdom that teaches Binah, certainly exists in 'Peleh' - hidden wisdom, except that as mentioned, it is wondrous and not defined.