
(5th Ois, **ויובן** זה בהקדים תחלה )
And this can be understood by first prefacing an explanation of the second interpretation of the verse "And his feet will stand on that day on the Mount of Olives" (Zechariah 14:4). Behold, oil is the aspect of wisdom (chochmah), as expounded on the verse (Deuteronomy 11:14) "And you will gather in your grain, your wine and your oil" - wine is the aspect of understanding (binah) and oil is the aspect of wisdom. (ראה אמרי בינה שער הק"ש פנ"ג ואילך פא, ב ואילך.)

And behold עיין ד"ה למען דעת רס"ט (סה"מ תרס"ט ע' מ ואילך)), it is known that water is the aspect of Chochmah (ב"ק יז, א.), as our Sages said "There is no water except Torah, for the Torah is the wisdom of the Holy One, Blessed be He." For within wisdom there are generally two levels:
The first level is the aspect of revealed Chochmah (חכמה (שבגילוי)), up to the level of Chochmah Illah, higher wisdom, חכמה עילאה. And the second level is the aspect of [[Chochmah Stima'a - חכמה סתימאה]] "concealed wisdom."

And this is the difference between water and oil - water is the aspect of revealed wisdom, resembling the nature of water which reveals itself, as water descends from a higher place to a lower place (תענית ז, א.). Meaning, by its very nature, water has the tendency towards flow and revelation, to the point that it flows and reveals itself even in a lowly place. In contrast, oil by its nature is hidden and concealed within the olives, and special effort - pressing/crushing - is required, and only through this is it drawn forth into revelation.

The same applies to the aspect of [[Chochmah Stima'a - חכמה סתימאה]] - it is intrinsically in a state of concealment and obscurity. And even when the aspect of revealed wisdom emanates from it, it is not that the aspect of concealed wisdom itself comes into revelation. Rather, the concealed wisdom remains obscured, and is merely the cause that facilitates the revelation of wisdom. 
(רק שהיא סיבה שעל ידה נמשך גילוי בחכמה)

This can be illustrated with the analogy of the human intellectual faculties: Koach Hamaskil, The "intellectual faculty" from which wisdom originates remains in concealment, unlike the flowing from wisdom to understanding - the "point in the palace" (ראה זח"א ו, רע"א. תקו"ז ריש תיקון ה (יט, א). תיקון כח (עב, ב). ועוד. תניא אגה"ק ס"ה (קז, א). ועוד.) where the point of wisdom itself extends into the expanse of understanding, until becoming a "palace" which functions (guards) within the "palace." In contrast, regarding the revelation of the revealed intellect from the intellectual faculty - the intellectual faculty itself remains in concealment, and merely facilitates the revelation of the intellect.

The same applies in the higher realms regarding the revelation of revealed wisdom ([[Chochmah - חכמה]]) from concealed wisdom[[Chochmah Stima'a - חכמה סתימאה]]: The aspect of concealed wisdom remains obscured, and only from it is the aspect of revealed wisdom brought into being, as it is written (איוב כח, יב) "והחכמה מאין תמצא" - indicating that the revelation of revealed wisdom from concealed wisdom is by way of "finding" or "discovery." To the extent that concealed wisdom, relative to revealed wisdom, is referred to as "nothing" (ayin). And the mode of revelation of revealed wisdom from concealed wisdom is through [[Parsa - פרסא]] or, to use the terminology sometimes stated, through a [[Tzimtzum - צמצום]].

This is the difference between water and oil: Water alludes to the aspect of revealed wisdom, [[Chochmah - חכמה]], which is the beginning of the [[Sefiros - ספירות|Sefiros]] and has a connection to the worlds that follow, particularly [[Binah - בינה]]. Whereas oil alludes to concealed wisdom, [[Chochmah Stima'a - חכמה סתימאה]], which is separate from the [[Sefiros - ספירות]], even from the aspect of (revealed) wisdom, and only from it is wisdom "found," as mentioned.

The reason that the revelation of revealed wisdom from the level of concealed wisdom occurs in a way where the concealed wisdom itself does not extend into revealed wisdom, but only facilitates its revelation, is because even the revelation of concealed wisdom itself from the level above it occurs in this manner:

Concealed wisdom, [[Chochmah Stima'a - חכמה סתימאה]],  is Chochmah of Kesser (חכמה שבכתר). Its revelation comes from the level of Kesser of Kesser (כתר שבכתר).

The manner in which the aspect of Chochmah of Kesser (חכמה שבכתר) is revealed from the level of Kesser of Kesser (כתר שבכתר), is that the level of Kesser of Kesser (כתר שבכתר) is merely a cause facilitating the revelation of the level of [[Chochmah Stima'a - חכמה סתימאה]]. This is the meaning of the verse "And wisdom, from where can it be found?" - "Chochmah" here refers (also) to [[Chochmah Stima'a - חכמה סתימאה]]. And as is known, [[Chochmah Stima'a - חכמה סתימאה]] is the root of the emanated realms, as will be further explained. Hence, its mode of coming into being is through a process of "finding", for Kesser of Kesser (כתר שבכתר) is the level of "nothing" relative to [[Chochmah Stima'a - חכמה סתימאה]], and from it, the level of concealed wisdom is "found."

And since the manner in which [[Chochmah Stima'a - חכמה סתימאה]] itself is revealed is through this process of "דמאין תמצא", therefore the revelation of revealed wisdom (חכמה הגלוי') from it also occurs in this manner.

Through this, we can understand the two opinions (טבול יום פ"ב מ"ה) regarding oil floating on top of wine - whether it constitutes a "joining" or not. At first glance we don't understand, since oil and wine correspond to [[Chochmah - חכמה]] and [[Binah - בינה]], which are described as "two friends who do not separate." So what is the reason behind the opinion that oil floating on wine does not constitute a joining?

However, the explanation is that since oil alludes to the level of [[Chochmah Stima'a - חכמה סתימאה]], as mentioned, and the level of [[Chochmah Stima'a - חכמה סתימאה]] is fundamentally separate from the level of revealed wisdom - to the point that there is an aspect of concealed wisdom that does not come into revelation at all within revealed wisdom, even not in the form of a cause (meaning, in addition to the fact that the manner in which Chochomah is revealed from Chochmah Stima'a is that the level of Chochmah Stima'a itself remains obscured and merely facilitates the revelation of Chochmah, there is an aspect of Chochmah Stima'a that does not manifest at all in Chochmah). Certainly then, this does not come into revelation within [[Binah - בינה]].
Therefore, there is an opinion that oil floating on top of wine does not constitute a joining.

[מאמר הללו את ה' כל גוים תשל"א - Chabad.org](https://www.chabad.org/therebbe/article_cdo/aid/3140382/jewish/page.htm)
[סה"מ מלוקט ח"א](https://drive.google.com/open?id=1RfTKfxTWsBPVilAI6CEG2XEAqw9cOcBF)