How should a person train himself in the attribute of [[Chochmah - חכמה|Chochmah]]? 
([[Chochmah - חכמה|Chochmah]] represents G-d's first creative activity (Pardes, sha'ar 5, ch. 4; Targum Yerushalmi, Bereishit 1:1). It is thus called "the beginning," from which everything else derives (Zohar, vol. I, p. 3b). [[Chochmah - חכמה|Chochmah]] is not apprehensible until it becomes enformed in binah (cf. Zohar, vol. I, p. 15b)) 



Although it is hidden and exceedingly exalted ("Even though [[Chochmah - חכמה|Chochmah]] is called 'being' in relation to the 'nothingness' of [[Kesser - כתר|Kesser]], ([[Chochmah - חכמה|Chochmah]]'s) being is incomprehensible and exceedingly re- fined" (Pardes, sha'ar 5, chs. 4-5)), the attribute of [[Chochmah - חכמה|Chochmah]] Above is spread out over all creation ("You have made them all in [[Chochmah - חכמה|Chochmah]]": "You have made them all be[[Chochmah - חכמה|Chochmah]]" can be understood in two interrelated ways in [[Chochmah - חכמה|Chochmah]] or by [[Chochmah - חכמה|Chochmah]]. The former interpretation implies that creation is founded in [[Chochmah - חכמה|Chochmah]] (Eitz Chaim, sha'ar 25, ch. 1). This is apparently Ramak's intention. The latter sense implies that [[Chochmah - חכמה|Chochmah]] is the tool of creation, as will be explained in the text and notes.) As it is written, "How many are Your works, O L-rd; You have made them all in [[Chochmah - חכמה|Chochmah]]..." (Tehillim 104:24). Similarly, a person's [[Chochmah - חכמה|Chochmah]] should pervade all his actions, and he should be ready to benefit and influence others with his [[Chochmah - חכמה|Chochmah]] according to their caрасity-letting nothing prevent him.

Now, the attribute of [[Chochmah - חכמה|Chochmah]] Above has two aspects: The higher aspect faces [[Kesser - כתר|Kesser]] and does not face downwards; rather, it receives from above. The lower aspect faces downwards, overseeing the other sefirot, to which the attribute of [[Chochmah - חכמה|Chochmah]] extends.

Likewise, a person should have two aspects: The first aspect should be communion in solitude with his Creator in order to increase and perfect his [[Chochmah - חכמה|Chochmah]]; the second should be to teach others the [[Chochmah - חכמה|Chochmah]] with which the Holy One, Blessed Be He, has endowed him. And just as the attribute of [[Chochmah - חכמה|Chochmah]] Above extends to each sefirah according to its measure and needs, one should disseminate his [[Chochmah - חכמה|Chochmah]] to each person in the measure his intellect can grasp, according to what is proper for him and his needs. One should take care not to give more than the mind of the recipient can contain, lest harm result, for the Supernal sefirah does not go beyond the limits of the recipient.

Moreover, it is the nature of [[Chochmah - חכמה|Chochmah]] to oversee all of existence, for it is the Supernal Thought, which con- templates everything that exists. Of [[Chochmah - חכמה|Chochmah]] it is said: "For My thoughts are not your thoughts..." (Yeshayahu 55:8), "...and He gives thought so that he who is exiled is banished forever" (II Shemuel 14:14), and " 'For I know the thoughts I think of you (House of Israel),' says the L-rd, 'thoughts of peace and not evil, to give you hope for the future" (Yirmeyahu 29:11).

In the same way, man should keep a watchful eye on the conduct of the nation of G-d in order to benefit it. His thoughts should be concerned with bringing near those who have strayed and thinking well of them. Just as the Divine Mind contemplates the benefit of all existence, he should contemplate the benefit of his fellows, taking counsel with G-d and His people regarding both individual and communal matters. And concerning one who has strayed from the good path, he should guide him to proper conduct, serving as his advisor and counselor and directing and leading him to good and forthright behavior, just as the Supernal Thought guides the highest worlds.

Furthermore, [[Chochmah - חכמה|Chochmah]] gives life to all things. As it is written: "...[[Chochmah - חכמה|Chochmah]] gives life to those who possess (Kohelet 7:12). Likewise, one should instruct the entire world in the ways of life, helping others attain life in this world and in the World to Come and providing them with the means to live. In general, one should give life to all beings.

In addition, [[Chochmah - חכמה|Chochmah]] is the source of all existence. As the verse states: "How many are Your works, O L-rd; You have made them all with [[Chochmah - חכמה|Chochmah]]..." (Tehillim 104:24). Thus, everything lives and exists due to that source.

In the same way, a person should act as father to all G-d's creatures, particularly Israel, for its holy souls emanate from that source. At all times, he should pray for mercy and blessing for the world, being like our Father Above, Who has compassion for His creatures. And regarding those afflicted with suffering, he should constantly pray for them as if they were his own children and he had formed them himself, for this is what the Holy One, Blessed Be He, desires. As Moshe, the faithful shepherd, said: "Did I conceive this nation...that You say to me, 'Carry it in your bosom...?" (BeMidbar 11:12). In this way, a person should carry all of G-d's people "as a nurse carries an infant" (ibid.). He should "...gather the lambs in his arm, lifting them to his bosom, and lead the little ones" (Yeshayahu 40:11). He should take care of the desolate, seek out the young, heal the broken, nourish the needy, and return the lost. One should have compassion for Israel, bearing its burdens cheerfully, just as the Merciful Father bears all. One should not tire or hide or despair, leading each person according to his needs. These are the qualities of [[Chochmah - חכמה|Chochmah]]: a father who is merciful to his children.

Furthermore, one's compassion should extend to all creatures, and he should neither despise nor destroy them, for the [[Chochmah - חכמה|Chochmah]] Above extends to all of creation- inanimate objects, plants, animals, and humans. For this reason, our sages have warned us against treating food disrespectfully. Just as the Supernal [[Chochmah - חכמה|Chochmah]] despises nothing, since everything is created from there - as the verse states, "You have made them all with [[Chochmah - חכמה|Chochmah]]" (Tehillim 104:24) - a person should show compassion to all the works of the Holy One, Blessed Be He. That's why Rabbi Yehudah the Prince was punished: He had no pity on a calf that tried to evade slaughter by hiding behind him, and he said to it, "Go! For this purpose, you were created," suffering - which derives from the aspect of severity came upon him, for compassion shields against severity. Thus, when Rabbi Yehudah the Prince had mercy on a weasel, quoting the verse "...His mercies extend to all His deeds" (Tehillim 145:9), he was delivered from severity, for the light of [[Chochmah - חכמה|Chochmah]] spread over him, and his suffering disappeared.

Similarly, one should not disparage any creature, for all of them were created with [[Chochmah - חכמה|Chochmah]]. Nor should one uproot plants unless they are needed or kill animals unless they are needed. And one should choose a noble death for them, using a carefully inspected knife, in order to maximize his compassion.

This is the general principle: Having pity on all beings and not hurting them depends on [[Chochmah - חכמה|Chochmah]]. However, if one intends to raise them higher and higher from plant to animal, and from animal to human - then it is permissible to uproot a plant and slaughter an animal, taking away from them in order to benefit them.